---
title: Chromecast without internet is the Shitcast
pubdate: 2017-07-20 19:05
moddate: 2017-07-20 19:05
tags: google, design, user experience
---

Chromecast without internet is the Shitcast
===========================================

buscar "Let me google that for you: google"

Enlace chromecast

Enlace a whatsapp

Enlace a plex

Enlace a youtube-dl


Enlace a Viki Rakuten en la play store

Enlace a wiki Viki Kim Bo Young (¿tiene perfil de peso?)

Enlace a wiki Viki serie

Enlace a reddit xiaomi wiki (cheap Chinese phones)

Enlace a knowyourmeme "You mean to say" black child, and create one:

"You mean to say, in your country WiFi means internet access?


Summer is one of those times of the year technical savvy people need to step
away from their usual hardware devices or face being labelled geeks, nerds,
autists, aspergers, freaks, or whatever the hip word is among the non technical
people. Writing software on the computer or teaching yourself new stuff at home
is bad. On the other hand, risking skin cancer and cirrhosis at the beach while
forwarding stale memes with privative messaging apps is cool.

Visiting my parents far away from civilization for a week I wanted to test this
thingy called Chromecast, sold by Google in supermarkets. It's a cheap
computer/Android streaming receiver you connect to a screen. My parents like
watching low quality videos of old memes sent through WhatsApp, but prefer to
do so on a big screen rather than their small phones, so I thought of bringing
it along some downloaded stuff.


The experiment
--------------

Of course I tested the Chromecast first at home. The setup went really smooth,
and even when I tried to switch WiFi networks or in general try to mess with
it, my Android phone would always be able to connect to the Chromecast and
reset it or configure it to join a different network. The setup consists of a
simple wizard tutorial you watch on the TV. The quality of the streamed image
is a little bad though.  Using a 5 GHz network showed visible compression
artifacts with Full HD (1080p) content.  It is certainly true that the
streaming is nearly immediate, but I would gladly accept buffering for a minute
if I could at least keep the quality I have on the desktop/phone. The device is
cheap since it has no user available storage, it's all streaming or nothing.

Worse than that, the device seemed incapable of displaying landscape 60fps
content. The only way I could manage to get 60fps was when I streamed a
`vertical kpop fancam <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o6_XfxK-yqk>`_, whose
visible area requires only one third of the bandwidth compared to the full
landscape picture area. 60fps landscape videos were always mangled down to
30fps, either from the Chrome browser (freshly updated/reinstalled) or even
from media center software like Plex. That pretty much explains why the 4k
Chromecast device *subtly offers* a hardware Ethernet connection option, since
you likely won't get `fluid <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zay95JNfSqg>`_ `4k
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fo05KG-xYz4>`_  `content
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zo8W-tdbqUg>`_ on any WiFi. The technical spec
mentions special WiFi beamforming hardware *might* be needed to achieve such
gargantuan screen resolution, but I wonder if such a thing exists outside of
some fancy Google lab environment.  However my parents' eyes won't mind the
lower artifact version with frame drop, so I didn't worry much. Also, certain
videos had a visible audio delay, and Chrome had troubles playing many of the
60fps ``.mkv`` files which ironically had been downloaded from Youtube earlier
for offline caching: they played but stuttered visually, as if displaying the
frames in the wrong order, 1 3 2 5 4… instead of 1 2 3 4 5…, making everything
unwatchable. But that seems more of a Chrome browser issue issue.

Before holidays I went to a friend to show off the Chromecast, since he had
heard about it and was interested in seeing how it performed. Again, once you
run Google's Home application on a WiFi phone the Chromecast is easily
configured to get the new password and join the network. Looking around the
play store we even found an app named Viki Rakuten which offered streaming
Corean dramas with Spanish subtitles. The alcohol joining us met the required
standards so we tried the first chapter of Strong Girl Do Bong Soon. This drama
goes about a weird fiction lineage of herculean strength Korean women. Despite
their looks, such women are so strong that even a handshake or a pat in the
back could break your bones. More importantly, the strength comes with a severe
requirement: you can't use it for your own personal advantage. If you do, you
get pimples on your face and lose the strength, transforming forever into a
normal woman to never again enjoy (or suffer!) super strength.

In the drama we follow the life of Do Bong Soon (actress Park Bo Young) who is
the failure daughter of a former weight lifting champion aggressive woman who
lost her strength while bullying others in… something that looked like college.
Or maybe Koreans in the old days wore school uniforms everywhere?  The bullying
continues despite the lack of strength though. Park Bo Young is an insanely
cute and comedic fit for the main actress, since she is terribly small and non
intimidating. Her profile page says she's 158cm and 41kg. The weight might be
all right, but the height is certainly out of proportion. My friend pointed out
that on a scene where she was hesitantly waiting before a door, the knob was
nearly the same height as her shoulders. She's either a hobbit or the director
wanted to display her as one and asked to build a special giant door. I hope
it's the former but without the ugly feet.

Park Bo Young tries to live as a normal person, always hiding her true power to
avoid others from noticing her, but of course this is pretty much impossible,
since she seems to be neutral lawful. The first chapter shows how she doesn't
even break a sweat dealing with some gangsters blocking a road and harassing a
bus driver willing to pass through. A rich young man is witness to the
situation and calls the police before he sees a comedic fight where each
gangster is dealt a hand of broken bones, one of them nearly visiting the
International Space Station. Later the rich guy decides to intervene at the
police station to lie about Do Bong Soon's strength (pointed out by small
children watching from the blocked bus on the road), managing to keep her away
from jail, and later contracting her as a personal bodyguard.

The whole ~1h chapter was streamed from the mobile phone lying on the table and
it still seemed to have enough juice to go through a second chapter without
plugging it in, which looked like an impressive feature for a not fully charged
device. Hardware video compression is pretty amazing these days, even in cheap
Chinese phones. Before packing to my parents I dusted off an old WiFi router
and made the Chromecast join its network. Later, away from civilization, my
friend texted me to tell the rest of the drama was fun (except the last
superfluous chapter). Alas, I had my own drama to experience.


The drama
---------

After arriving and selling the wonders of the Chromecast to my parents I
proceeded to plug in the device to their TV and turn on the WiFi router. The
device powered up, connected to the WiFi and displayed the same message I saw
before leaving civilization: the connected WiFi doesn't have internet access.
Well, duh, that's the idea, right? Of course the device would display this
since it shows random wallpaper pictures when nothing is being cast to it. But
now other Android devices on the network wouldn't display the "cast to device"
icon, which was worrisome.  Entering Google's Home app displayed the available
device and an ominous message: this device needs to be configured.  What the
hell Google? I went several times through the set up process and every time the
setup halted at the very last moment: the Chromecast must phone home and
refuses to work unless it connects somewhere for some unknown purpose. It's not
even updates, since a few days ago it had been updated and online on an
Internet connected WiFi at home.

.. raw:: html

    <center>
    <img
        src="../../../i/shitcast_1.jpg"
        alt="Vuelve a conectarme. "ShitCast" está conectado a mini chrome, pero no tiene acceso a Internet. Comprueba que tu conexión a Internet funcione. De lo contrario, abre la aplicación Google Home para seleccionar otra red."
        style="width:100%;max-width:750px" align="center"
        hspace="8pt" vspace="8pt"><br>
        <b>"ShitCast" is connected to mini chrome, but doesn't have internet
        access.</b>

    </center>


The solution to patch this horrible design decision was to create a WiFi on my
phone with data connection and let the Shitcast join it, as well as other
mobile phones. Then, once the Shitcast is happy (it takes less than a second to
go through that last inconvenient step **iff** you have internet), turn off
mobile data to avoid idiotic wallpapers and updates siphon the data cap, but
keep the WiFi on.  After some seconds the pretty online wallpapers disappear
and you get again the Screen Of Fuck Off You Third World Citizen Without
Internet Access (or **SOFOYTWCWIA** for brevity), but fortunately once the
Shitcast has been able to phone home once you are able to stream locally to it
even without internet connectivity.

Unless you plug the device off and turn it on again. Then it displays those
pretty wallpapers for a few seconds before showing again the **SOFOYTWCWIA**
and disabling local network streaming unless you turn on Internet access again
on and off on the phone. Kind of annoying the videos I wanted to stream were on
the phone making the WiFi, and the Home app thinks it doesn't have WiFi access
when you create one yourself… so I had to copy the videos to another phone. But
why is the phoning home needed? Why does the device not even allow local
streaming until it can phone the mother ship? Ah, wait, this is the privacy
concerned company we are talking about, Google. Yeah, what a turn off, just
like not being able to block internet access for mobile apps, because every app
has to be able to show ads and phone home. Got it.

Still, I looked through the packaging and detailed description and there is
nowhere to be found that the device **requires** internet access, it only says
WiFi is required. How unfortunate of me to *presume* WiFi means WiFi without
Internet access.

.. raw:: html

    <center>
    <img
        src="../../../i/shitcast_2.jpg"
        alt="Vuelve a conectarme. "ShitCast" está conectado a mini chrome, pero no tiene acceso a Internet. Comprueba que tu conexión a Internet funcione. De lo contrario, abre la aplicación Google Home para seleccionar otra red."
        style="width:100%;max-width:600px" align="center"
        hspace="8pt" vspace="8pt"><br>
        <b>Connect the Chromecast to an HDMI port and join a WiFi network.</b><br>
    <img
        src="../../../i/shitcast_3.jpg"
        alt="Vuelve a conectarme. "ShitCast" está conectado a mini chrome, pero no tiene acceso a Internet. Comprueba que tu conexión a Internet funcione. De lo contrario, abre la aplicación Google Home para seleccionar otra red."
        style="width:100%;max-width:750px" align="center"
        hspace="8pt" vspace="8pt"><br>
        <b>Chromecast requires a television with an HDMI port, a Wi-Fi network
        and a computer or compatible mobile device.</b>

    </center>


Conclusion
----------

I paid 40 bucks for a Shitcast and all I got was this lousy rant. Also, don't
live in a third world country where *WiFi network* could mean no internet
access.

meme del chaval negro "me dices que"
